docs: Best practices (#19634)
microsoft/playwright: docs/src/best-practices-js.md

---
id: best-practices
title: "Best Practices"
---

This guide should help you to make sure you are following our best practices and writing tests that are more resilient.
## Use locators

> In order to write end to end tests we need to first find elements on the webpage. Automated tests should verify that the application code works for the end users. Implementation details are things which users of your code will not typically use, see, or even know about such as the name of a function or if it's an array. The end user will see or interact with what we render so our test should typically only see/interact with the rendered output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to write end to end tests we need to first find elements on the webpage. Automated tests should verify that the application code works for the end users, and avoid relying on implementation details. Things which users will not typically use, see, or even know about such as the name of a function, whether something is an array, or the CSS class of some element. The end user will see or interact with what is rendered on the page, so test should typically only see/interact with the same rendered output.
```

> In order to write end to end tests we need to first find elements on the webpage. Automated tests should verify that the application code works for the end users. Implementation details are things which users of your code will not typically use, see, or even know about such as the name of a function or if it's an array. The end user will see or interact with what we render so our test should typically only see/interact with the rendered output.

Reviewer: I like this first paragraph, however it doesn't seem to fit the locators section. I'd recommend add a bit of "test isolation" here, and make a separate first section about the "testing philosophy" or something like that 😄 : 1. test user-visible behavior, 2. make tests as isolated as possible.

Use Playwright's built in [locators](./locators.md) to find element(s) on the page. Locators come with auto waiting and retry-ability. Auto waiting means that Playwright performs a range of actionability checks on the elements, such as ensuring the element is visible and enabled before it performs the click. To make tests resilient, we recommend prioritizing user-facing attributes and explicit contracts.

```js
👍 page.getByRole('button', { name: 'submit' })
```

#### Prefer user-facing attributes to xpath or css selectors

Your DOM can easily change so having your tests depend on your DOM structure can lead to failing tests. For example consider selecting this button by its CSS classes. Should the designer change something then the class might change breaking your test. 

```js
👎 page.locator('button.buttonIcon.episode-actions-later')
```

Use locators that are resilient to changes in the DOM.

```js
👍 page.getByRole('button', { name: 'submit' })
```

> ## Generate locaters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Generate locators
```

Playwright has a [test generator](./codegen.md) that can generate tests and pick locators for you. It will look at your page and figure out the best locator, prioritizing role, text and test id locators. If the generator finds multiple elements matching the locator, it will improve the locator to make it resilient and uniquely identify the target element, so you don't have to worry about failing tests due to locators.

#### Use the codegen to generate locators

To pick a locator you can run the codegen command and click on the pick locator button. Then hover over your page in the browser window and click on the element you want to pick. You can then copy and paste this locator into your code. You can also use the codegen to record a test for you.

```bash
npx playwright codegen
```
#### Use the VS Code extension to generate locators

You can also use the [VS Code Extension](./getting-started-vscode.md) to generate locators as well as record a test. The VS Code extension also gives you a great developer experience when writing, running and debugging tests.

## Use web first assertions

> Assertions are a way to verify that the expected result and the actual result matched or not. By using [web first assertions](./test-assertions.md) Playwright will wait until the expected condition is met. For Example when testing a toast message, if you click a button that makes a toast message appear you can test the toast message is there. If the toast takes half a second to appear Playwright will wait. Web assertions such as `toBeVisible()` will wait and retry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assertions are a way to verify that the expected result and the actual result matched or not. By using [web first assertions](./test-assertions.md) Playwright will wait until the expected condition is met. For example, when testing a toast message, a test would click a button that makes a toast message appear and check that the toast message is there. If the toast takes half a second to appear, assertions such as `toBeVisible()` will wait and retry if needed.
```

```js

> 👍 await expect(page.getByText('welcome')).toBeVisible();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
👍 await expect(page.getByText('welcome')).toBeVisible();

👎 expect(await page.getByText('welcome').isVisible()).toBe(true);
```

```

#### Don't use manual assertions

Don't use manual assertions that are not awaiting the expect. In the code below the await is inside the expect rather than before it. When using assertions such as `isVisible()` the test wont wait a single second, it will just check the locator is there and return immediately. Use web first assertions such as `toBeVisible()` instead.

```js

> 👎 expect(await page.getByText('welcome')).isVisible()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
👎 expect(await page.getByText('welcome').isVisible()).toBe(true);
```

```

Use web first assertions such as `toBeVisible()` instead.

```js
👍 await expect(page.getByText('welcome')).toBeVisible();
```

> ## Configure post-mortem debugging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configure debugging
```

> Use the playwright [trace viewer](./trace-viewer.md) for local debugging and post mortem debugging instead of videos and screenshots. The trace viewer gives you a full trace of your tests as a local PWA that can easily be shared. With the trace viewer you can view the timeline, inspect DOM snapshots for each action, view network requests and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Debug your tests live in VSCode. <add a link/text here>

For CI failures, use the playwright [trace viewer](./trace-viewer.md) instead of videos and screenshots. The trace viewer gives you a full trace of your tests as a local PWA that can easily be shared. With the trace viewer you can view the timeline, inspect DOM snapshots for each action, view network requests and more.
```

Traces are set to run on CI on the first retry of a failed test. However you can also run a trace locally when developing.

```js
npx playwright test --trace on
```
## Mock API responses

> Only test what you control. Don't try to test links to external sites or third party servers that you do not control. Not only is it time consuming and can slow down your tests but also you can not control the content of the page you are linking to, if there are cookie banners or overlay pages or anything else that might cause your test to fail.

Reviewer: This is also a great bit about "testing philosophy".

> Intercepting the route with a mock response ensures the link is visible and clickable. Before hitting the link the route gets intercepted and a mock response is returned. Clicking the link results in a new page being opened containing the mock response rather than the actual page. We can then check this has the URL we expect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of testing an external link.

Intercepting the route with a mock response ensures the link is visible and clickable. Before hitting the link the route gets intercepted and a mock response is returned. Clicking the link results in a new page being opened containing the mock response rather than the actual page. We can then check this has the URL we expect.
```

```js
test('github link works', async ({ page }) => {
    await page.context().route('https://www.github.com/**', route => route.fulfill({
      body: '<html><body><h1>Github - Playwright</h1></body></html>'
    }));

    const [page1] = await Promise.all([
      page.waitForEvent('popup'),

>       await page.getByRole('link', { name: 'linkedIn' }).click()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      page.getByRole('link', { name: 'linkedIn' }).click()
```

>       page.getByRole('link', { name: 'linkedIn' }).click()

Reviewer: It is strange that "linkedIn" link leads to github.

    ]);
    await expect(page1).toHaveURL('https://www.github.com/microsoft/playwright');
  });
```
## Use Playwright's Tooling

Playwright comes with a range of tooling to help you write tests. 
- The [VS Code extension](./getting-started-vscode.md) gives you a great developer experience when writing, running and debugging tests. 
- The [test generator](./codegen.md) can generate tests and pick locators for you.
- The [trace viewer](./trace-viewer.md) gives you a full trace of your tests as a local PWA that can easily be shared. With the trace viewer you can view the timeline, inspect DOM snapshots for each action, view network requests and more.

> - [Typescript](./test-typescript) in Playwright works out of the box and gives you better IDE integrations. When using VS Code it will show you everything you can do and highlight when you do something wrong. No TypeScript experience is needed and it is not necessary for your code to be in TypeScript, all you need to do is create your tests with a `.ts` extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Typescript](./test-typescript) in Playwright works out of the box and gives you better IDE integrations. Your IDE will show you everything you can do and highlight when you do something wrong. No TypeScript experience is needed and it is not necessary for your code to be in TypeScript, all you need to do is create your tests with a `.ts` extension.
```

```js tab=js-js
// playwright.config.js
// @ts-check
const { devices } = require('@playwright/test');

/** @type {import('@playwright/test').PlaywrightTestConfig} */
const config = {
  projects: [
    {
      name: 'chromium',
      use: { ...devices['Desktop Chrome'] },
    },
    {
      name: 'firefox',
      use: { ...devices['Desktop Firefox'] },
    },
    {
      name: 'webkit',
      use: { ...devices['Desktop Safari'] },
    },
  ],
};

module.exports = config;
```

```js tab=js-ts
// playwright.config.ts
import { type PlaywrightTestConfig, devices } from '@playwright/test';

const config: PlaywrightTestConfig = {
  projects: [
    {
      name: 'chromium',
      use: { ...devices['Desktop Chrome'] },
    },
    {
      name: 'firefox',
      use: { ...devices['Desktop Firefox'] },
    },
    {
      name: 'webkit',
      use: { ...devices['Desktop Safari'] },
    },
  ],
};
export default config;
```

## Keep your Playwright dependency up to date

> By keeping your Playwright version up to date you will be able to test your app on the latest browser versions and catch failures before the latest browser version is released to the public. Check the [release notes](./release-notes.md) to see what the latest version is and what changes have been released. Releases happen on a monthly basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By keeping your Playwright version up to date you will be able to test your app on the latest browser versions and catch failures before the latest browser version is released to the public. Check the [release notes](./release-notes.md) to see what the latest version is and what changes have been released.
```

```js

> npm install -D @playwright/test

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
npm install -D @playwright/test@latest
```

```

## Run tests on CI

Setup CI/CD and run your tests frequently. The more often you run your tests the better. Ideally you should run your tests on each commit and pull request. Use [parallelism and sharding](./test-parallel.md).

Use linux when running your tests on CI as it is cheaper. Developers can use whatever environment when running locally but use linux on CI.

> If working with a database then make sure you control the data. Test against a staging environment and make sure it doesn't change. For visual regression tests make sure the operating system and browser versions are the same.

Reviewer: "If working with a database then make sure you control the data. Test against a staging environment and make sure it doesn't change." - one more testing philosophy topic.

---
id: best-practices
title: "Best Practices"
---

This guide should help you to make sure you are following our best practices and writing tests that are more resilient.

## Testing philosophy

### Test user-visible behavior

> Automated tests should verify that the application code works for the end users, and avoid relying on implementation details. Things which users will not typically use, see, or even know about such as the name of a function, whether something is an array, or the CSS class of some element. The end user will see or interact with what is rendered on the page, so your test should typically only see/interact with the same rendered output.

Reviewer 3: > Things which users will not typically use, see, or even know about such as the name of a function, whether something is an array, or the CSS class of some element.

sentence fragment

### Make tests as isolated as possible

> Each test should be completely isolated from another test and should run independently with it's own local storage, session storage, cookies etc. [Test isolation](./browser-contexts.md) improves reproducibility, makes debugging easier and prevents cascading test failures.

Reviewer 3: "its own local storage, session storage, cookies, etc." would be better

In order to avoid repetition for a particular part of your test you can use [before and after hooks](/api/class-test.md) or [global setup](/auth.md#reuse-signed-in-state). Within your test file add a before hook to run a part of your test before each test such as going to a particular URL or logging in to a part of your app. This keeps your tests isolated as no test relies on another. However it is also ok to have a little duplication when tests are simple enough especially if it keeps your tests clearer and easier to read and maintain.

> ### Write less tests but longer tests

Reviewer 3: fewer tests

When it comes to end to end testing having long tests is not a bad thing. It's ok to have multiple actions and assertions in your test. You should avoid separating your assertions into individual test blocks as it doesn't really bring much value and just slows down the running of your tests. 

> If your test does fail, Playwright will give you an error message showing what part of the test failed which you can see either in VS Code, the terminal, the HTML report or the trace viewer. You can also use [soft assertions](/test-assertions.md#soft-assertions) which do not terminate test execution but mark the test as failed.

Reviewer 3: the HTML report, or the trace viewer

(it looks like you're using Oxford commas elsewhere in this doc, so be consistent)

Only test what you control. Don't try to test links to external sites or third party servers that you do not control. Not only is it time consuming and can slow down your tests but also you can not control the content of the page you are linking to, if there are cookie banners or overlay pages or anything else that might cause your test to fail.

### Testing with a database

If working with a database then make sure you control the data. Test against a staging environment and make sure it doesn't change. For visual regression tests make sure the operating system and browser versions are the same.

## Best Practices

### Use locators

In order to write end to end tests we need to first find elements on the webpage. We can do this by using Playwright's built in [locators](./locators.md). Locators come with auto waiting and retry-ability. Auto waiting means that Playwright performs a range of actionability checks on the elements, such as ensuring the element is visible and enabled before it performs the click. To make tests resilient, we recommend prioritizing user-facing attributes and explicit contracts.

```js
👍 page.getByRole('button', { name: 'submit' })
```

> #### Prefer user-facing attributes to xpath or css selectors

Reviewer 3: XPath and CSS

Your DOM can easily change so having your tests depend on your DOM structure can lead to failing tests. For example consider selecting this button by its CSS classes. Should the designer change something then the class might change breaking your test. 

```js
👎 page.locator('button.buttonIcon.episode-actions-later')
```

Use locators that are resilient to changes in the DOM.

```js
👍 page.getByRole('button', { name: 'submit' })
```
### Generate locators

Playwright has a [test generator](./codegen.md) that can generate tests and pick locators for you. It will look at your page and figure out the best locator, prioritizing role, text and test id locators. If the generator finds multiple elements matching the locator, it will improve the locator to make it resilient and uniquely identify the target element, so you don't have to worry about failing tests due to locators.

> #### Use codegen to generate locators

Reviewer 3: Use `codegen` to generate locators

(surround with backticks)

> To pick a locator you can run the codegen command and click on the pick locator button. Then hover over your page in the browser window and click on the element you want to pick. You can then copy and paste this locator into your code. You can also use the codegen to record a test for you.

Reviewer 3: `codegen`

(surround with backticks)

```bash
npx playwright codegen
```
#### Use the VS Code extension to generate locators

> You can also use the [VS Code Extension](./getting-started-vscode.md) to generate locators as well as record a test. The VS Code extension also gives you a great developer experience when writing, running and debugging tests.

Reviewer 3: running, and debugging

(use Oxford comma again)

### Use web first assertions

> Assertions are a way to verify that the expected result and the actual result matched or not. By using [web first assertions](./test-assertions.md) Playwright will wait until the expected condition is met. For example, when testing a toast message, a test would click a button that makes a toast message appear and check that the toast message is there. If the toast takes half a second to appear, assertions such as `toBeVisible()` will wait and retry if needed.

Reviewer 3: Please consider making "toast" be a link to a good definition of what a toast message is. I had never heard that phrase before, so it's probably new to others as well.

```js
👍 await expect(page.getByText('welcome')).toBeVisible();

👎 expect(await page.getByText('welcome').isVisible()).toBe(true);
```

#### Don't use manual assertions

Don't use manual assertions that are not awaiting the expect. In the code below the await is inside the expect rather than before it. When using assertions such as `isVisible()` the test wont wait a single second, it will just check the locator is there and return immediately. Use web first assertions such as `toBeVisible()` instead.

```js
👎 expect(await page.getByText('welcome').isVisible()).toBe(true);
```

Use web first assertions such as `toBeVisible()` instead.

```js
👍 await expect(page.getByText('welcome')).toBeVisible();
```

### Configure debugging

[Debug your tests live in VSCode.](/getting-started-vscode#live-debugging)

> For CI failures, use the playwright [trace viewer](./trace-viewer.md) instead of videos and screenshots. The trace viewer gives you a full trace of your tests as a local Progressive Web App (PWA) that can easily be shared. With the trace viewer you can view the timeline, inspect DOM snapshots for each action, view network requests and more.

Reviewer 3: Playwright

(capitalize)

> Traces are set to run on CI on the first retry of a failed test. We don't recommend setting this to 'on' so that traces are run on every test as it's very performance heavy. However you can run a trace locally when developing with the `--trace` flag.

Reviewer 3: I'd use backticks here: `on` instead of 'on'

```js
npx playwright test --trace on
```
### Use Playwright's Tooling

Playwright comes with a range of tooling to help you write tests. 

> - The [VS Code extension](./getting-started-vscode.md) gives you a great developer experience when writing, running and debugging tests. 

Author: I have no idea what Oxford comma style is ;)

```js tab=js-js
// playwright.config.js
// @ts-check
const { devices } = require('@playwright/test');

/** @type {import('@playwright/test').PlaywrightTestConfig} */
const config = {
  projects: [
    {
      name: 'chromium',
      use: { ...devices['Desktop Chrome'] },
    },
    {
      name: 'firefox',
      use: { ...devices['Desktop Firefox'] },
    },
    {
      name: 'webkit',
      use: { ...devices['Desktop Safari'] },
    },
  ],
};

module.exports = config;
```

```js tab=js-ts
// playwright.config.ts
import { type PlaywrightTestConfig, devices } from '@playwright/test';

const config: PlaywrightTestConfig = {
  projects: [
    {
      name: 'chromium',
      use: { ...devices['Desktop Chrome'] },
    },
    {
      name: 'firefox',
      use: { ...devices['Desktop Firefox'] },
    },
    {
      name: 'webkit',
      use: { ...devices['Desktop Safari'] },
    },
  ],
};
export default config;
```

### Mock third-party API responses

> If you want to test links to third party API's then you should intercept the route with a mock response. This ensures the link is visible and clickable. Before hitting the link the route gets intercepted and a mock response is returned. Clicking the link results in a new page being opened containing the mock response rather than the actual page. We can then check this has the URL we expect.

Reviewer 3: I don't follow the connection between this paragraph of text and the code sample below. The code shows following a normal HTML link it seems. I don't see anything about a "third party API".

Author: but its not a normal HTML link. its a link to an external site like GitHub or could be twitter etc so you are hitting their API. So image testing the social links in your menu. you want to make sure the link is clickable so people can follow you. But you dont want to hit GitHubs or Twitters server. Could be called Mock third-party links but that sounds weird.

```js
test('github link works', async ({ page }) => {
    await page.context().route('https://www.github.com/**', route => route.fulfill({
      body: '<html><body><h1>Github - Playwright</h1></body></html>'
    }));

    const [page1] = await Promise.all([
      page.waitForEvent('popup'),
      page.getByRole('link', { name: 'GitHub' }).click()
    ]);
    await expect(page1).toHaveURL('https://www.github.com/microsoft/playwright');
  });
```

### Keep your Playwright dependency up to date

By keeping your Playwright version up to date you will be able to test your app on the latest browser versions and catch failures before the latest browser version is released to the public. Check the [release notes](./release-notes.md) to see what the latest version is and what changes have been released.

```js
npm install -D @playwright/test@latest
```

### Run tests on CI

Setup CI/CD and run your tests frequently. The more often you run your tests the better. Ideally you should run your tests on each commit and pull request. Use [parallelism and sharding](./test-parallel.md).

> Use linux when running your tests on CI as it is cheaper. Developers can use whatever environment when running locally but use linux on CI.

Reviewer 3: capitalize Linux

---
id: best-practices
title: "Best Practices"
---

This guide should help you to make sure you are following our best practices and writing tests that are more resilient.

## Testing philosophy

### Test user-visible behavior

Automated tests should verify that the application code works for the end users, and avoid relying on implementation details. Things which users will not typically use, see, or even know about such as the name of a function, whether something is an array, or the CSS class of some element. The end user will see or interact with what is rendered on the page, so your test should typically only see/interact with the same rendered output.

### Make tests as isolated as possible

Each test should be completely isolated from another test and should run independently with it's own local storage, session storage, cookies etc. [Test isolation](./browser-contexts.md) improves reproducibility, makes debugging easier and prevents cascading test failures.

> In order to avoid repetition for a particular part of your test you can use [before and after hooks](/api/class-test.md). Within your test file add a before hook to run a part of your test before each test such as going to a particular URL or logging in to a part of your app. This keeps your tests isolated as no test relies on another. However it is also ok to have a little duplication when tests are simple enough especially if it keeps your tests clearer and easier to read and maintain.

Reviewer: Linking to "reuse storage state" section of the auth doc would also help.

### Make your tests fail

> Visually seeing your test pass is a great way to gain confidence in your tests. But sometimes you can't follow everything as your tests run too fast or perhaps you are running in headless mode and therefore not visually seeing anything. Making your tests fail ensures you understand what the test is not expecting. The error message should tell you what it received and what it expected. It's very easy to write a test that never fails which isn't much use at all.

Reviewer: I am not sure I follow this paragraph entirely.

Author: ok removed for now. will come up with something better later perhaps

### Write less tests but longer tests

> When it comes to end to end testing having long tests is not a bad thing. It's ok to have multiple actions and assertions in your test. You should avoid separating your assertions into individual test blocks as it doesn't really bring much value and just slows down the running of your tests. If your test does fail Playwright will give you an error message showing what part of the test failed which you can see either in VS Code, the terminal, the HTML report or the trace viewer.

Reviewer: Suggest using `expect.soft()` when possible, to gather as much failures from a single test as possible.

Reviewer 4: We've come to the same conclusion making the test a bit longer to test different scenarios while on a page (invalid input, with valid input, no input for example) to check the ui validation for example. We found utilizing the test.step() for these helped break up the different tests and made the playwright test report much nicer to view.

Author: thanks. will look into it some more and follow up in another pr

### Mock API responses

Only test what you control. Don't try to test links to external sites or third party servers that you do not control. Not only is it time consuming and can slow down your tests but also you can not control the content of the page you are linking to, if there are cookie banners or overlay pages or anything else that might cause your test to fail.

> Here is an example of testing an external link:

Reviewer: This part with the mocking example doesn't really fit the "philosophy" section. I would also rename "Mock API responses" to "Avoid testing third-party dependencies".
